README.md, before:

# Battery Stress test to Raspberry Pico
This is a project to benchmark Raspberry Pico with LTE connectivity in a basic IoT scenario to find out max. runtime when powered by battery. I did not find any tangible numbers on this so I decided to do my own testing here.

## Purpose
Find out how long a Raspberry Pico can be powered by a basic battery when it reads & sends some sensor data in periodic intervals. 

The sensor data that is transmitted is basically this JSON:

    {
        "i": ID of the device, 
        "t": Timestamp of the device, 
        "c": Temperature read out by Pico, 
        "la": Current GPS latitude, 
        "lo": Current GPS longitude
    }

The idea is that the device sends these values once every 20 minutes before sleeping & starting the cycle again (by rebooting).

## Building blocks
These are the HW+SW components used here:

1. [Sixfab Pico LTE with GPS antenna](https://sixfab.com/product/sixfab-pico-lte/): RP2040-based board with LTE modem (Quectel BG95-M3) and antenna onboard that also includes data volume at reasonable price 
2. [Powerboost 1000C Charger](https://www.adafruit.com/product/2465): Enables running the board via battery and also charge it while its running
3. [LiPo battery with 2500 mAh and 3.7V](https://www.adafruit.com/product/328): Typical battery that is reasonably priced (~$15), fits into a case and should be able to power the RP2040 for a few days
4. [Micropython](https://micropython.org/download/?mcu=rp2040): Easy to learn & build, definitely not  the most efficient language in the world but all tasks needed for this project can be built rather easily compared to C.
5. [Azure IoT Hub](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/iot-hub): MQTT endpoint in the Cloud that I used primarily because I'm comfortable with Azure. Provides a free tier with max. 8000 messages/day which is more than enough. Other options like [MQTTHQ](https://mqtthq.com/) may be simpler and also worked for me.
6. [Azure Blob Storage](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/storage/blobs): Simple way to store uploaded data reliably for all kinds of further processing. I simply stored each message from the device as a JSON file. The way the [Azure samples from Pico LTE SDK](https://docs.sixfab.com/docs/sixfab-pico-lte-micropython-sdk) work is that they update the Device Twin in IoT Hub each time so a dedicated route had to be set up to actually store the data/see changes somewhere. See https://stackoverflow.com/a/47893851/675454.

## Setup
Setup mainly follows the instrcuctions given here:

https://docs.sixfab.com/docs/sixfab-pico-lte-getting-started
https://docs.sixfab.com/docs/pico-lte-azure-iot-hub-connection

So essentially everything below the `/python` directory is what I had on my device. Of course your certificates will vary since you'll use your own IoT broker, the `/cert/user_key.pem` must be added anyway for the actual private key of the client.

My device had the issue that it was never able to connect to the MNO via LTE initially. I had to nuke the flash file once, afterwards connecting worked rather quickly and remained stable ever since:

https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/microcontrollers/raspberry-pi-pico.html#resetting-flash-memory

## Results
So in theory that should be the cinsumption based on the numbers I found in the [datasheet](https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/rp2040/rp2040-datasheet.pdf / https://docs.sixfab.com/docs/sixfab-pico-lte-technical-details):

Raspberry Pico "normal": 25mA
Raspberry Pico "Sleep": 0.39mA
Raspberry Pico "Dormant": 0.18mA
Pico LTE "max": 1.5A


Pico LTE measuredtypical power consumption (boot, idle): 0,9W

For the Sixfab board I did not find any numbers, here's what I measured:




See the major findings here:

Data consumption/week for one message every approx. 20 minutes (resulting in ~2150 status messages/week): TODO MB

Maximum runtime: 30 hours

| Scenario      | Runtime | # of messages received | Data consumption
| ----------- | ----------- | ---- | --------
| No Power saving | ~1760 minutes = 30h | 82 | 181kB (~2kB/message) |
| Power saving approach 1 | TODO minutes | 123 | 123 |
| Power saving approach 2 | TODO minutes | 123 | 123 |

Commit message:

Refactoring and hardening of WiFi logic, adding systemd definition for subscriber

README.md, after:

# Battery Stress test to Raspberry Pico
This is a project to benchmark Raspberry Pico with LTE connectivity in a basic IoT scenario to find out max. runtime when powered by battery. I did not find any tangible numbers on this so I decided to do my own testing here.

## Purpose
Find out how long a Raspberry Pico can be powered by a basic battery when it reads & sends some sensor data in periodic intervals. 

The sensor data that is transmitted is basically this JSON:

    {
        "i": ID of the device, 
        "t": Timestamp of the device, 
        "c": Temperature read out by Pico, 
        "la": Current GPS latitude, 
        "lo": Current GPS longitude
    }

The idea is that the device sends these values once every 20 minutes before sleeping & starting the cycle again (by rebooting).

## Building blocks
These are the HW+SW components used here:

1. [Sixfab Pico LTE with GPS antenna](https://sixfab.com/product/sixfab-pico-lte/): RP2040-based board with LTE modem (Quectel BG95-M3) and antenna onboard that also includes data volume at reasonable price 
2. [Powerboost 1000C Charger](https://www.adafruit.com/product/2465): Enables running the board via battery and also charge it while its running
3. [LiPo battery with 2500 mAh and 3.7V](https://www.adafruit.com/product/328): Typical battery that is reasonably priced (~$15), fits into a case and should be able to power the RP2040 for a few days
4. [Micropython](https://micropython.org/download/?mcu=rp2040): Easy to learn & build, definitely not  the most efficient language in the world but all tasks needed for this project can be built rather easily compared to C.
5. [Azure IoT Hub](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/iot-hub): MQTT endpoint in the Cloud that I used primarily because I'm comfortable with Azure. Provides a free tier with max. 8000 messages/day which is more than enough. Other options like [MQTTHQ](https://mqtthq.com/) may be simpler and also worked for me.
6. [Azure Blob Storage](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/storage/blobs): Simple way to store uploaded data reliably for all kinds of further processing. I simply stored each message from the device as a JSON file. The way the [Azure samples from Pico LTE SDK](https://docs.sixfab.com/docs/sixfab-pico-lte-micropython-sdk) work is that they update the Device Twin in IoT Hub each time so a dedicated route had to be set up to actually store the data/see changes somewhere. See https://stackoverflow.com/a/47893851/675454.

## Setup
Setup mainly follows the instructions given here:

https://docs.sixfab.com/docs/sixfab-pico-lte-getting-started
https://docs.sixfab.com/docs/pico-lte-azure-iot-hub-connection

So essentially everything below the `/python` directory is what I had on my device. Of course your certificates will vary since you'll use your own IoT broker, the `/cert/user_key.pem` must be added anyway for the actual private key of the client.

My device had the issue that it was never able to connect to the MNO via LTE initially. I had to nuke the flash file once, afterwards connecting worked rather quickly and remained stable ever since:

https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/microcontrollers/raspberry-pi-pico.html#resetting-flash-memory

## WiFi
As fallback in case of missing LTE connectivity a WiFi-based solution was built, see the `emqx` subdirectory. This uses the public broker from https://www.emqx.com/en/mqtt/public-mqtt5-broker.

For subscribing a simple Python script `subscriber.py` was added that stores all received messages in an Azure Blob Storage. This script should run as systemd service, see its definition there as well. To set it up (also for reboot):

    sudo systemctl enable mqtt_subscriber.service
    sudo systemctl start mqtt_subscriber.service

Get the logs

    sudo journalctl -u mqtt_subscriber.service -f

## Results
So in theory that should be the cinsumption based on the numbers I found in the [datasheet](https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/rp2040/rp2040-datasheet.pdf / https://docs.sixfab.com/docs/sixfab-pico-lte-technical-details):

Raspberry Pico "normal": 25mA
Raspberry Pico "Sleep": 0.39mA
Raspberry Pico "Dormant": 0.18mA
Pico LTE "max": 1.5A


Pico LTE measuredtypical power consumption (boot, idle): 0,9W

For the Sixfab board I did not find any numbers, here's what I measured:




See the major findings here:

Data consumption/week for one message every approx. 20 minutes (resulting in ~2150 status messages/week): TODO MB

Maximum runtime: 30 hours

| Scenario      | Runtime | # of messages received | Data consumption
| ----------- | ----------- | ---- | --------
| No Power saving | ~1760 minutes = 30h | 82 | 181kB (~2kB/message) |
| Power saving approach 1 | TODO minutes | 123 | 123 |
| Power saving approach 2 | TODO minutes | 123 | 123 |
